 

 
Consultancy Announcement: On-Call Service Provider (Web portal Developer) 
Date of Announcement: October 28, 2016 
Duration: Initial 2 months, thereafter estimated a day per week (12 Months) 
Location: Sanepa Chowk, Kathmandu 
                               

 

1.  Summary 

 

We are currently seeking a service provider Web portal developer to support surveying and 
mapping efforts of Habitat for Humanity’s construction initiatives in Nepal. The agency will 
work closely with the existing technical team while the infrastructure is being created to learn 
its technical specifications and any best practices.  
 
Moreover,  the  workload  will  entail  basic  CRUD,  visualization  and  web  maps  development 
within  one  month  as  a  first  phase.  The  process  for  automation  shall  be  developed  in  the 
second phase which will contain one month of development phase and training. The progress 
should be updated every week in the form of demonstration. Regarding payment, it can be 
discussed further.   
 
Once  the  environment  is  functional  and  stable,  the  agency  will  assume  administrative 
responsibilities including planned maintenance and ad-hoc technical support. The stack used 
in this project will be hosted in Amazon Web Services and uses EC2 servers. 
 
 
2.  Background 

Following  last  year’s  earthquakes,  Habitat  for  Humanity  Nepal  mobilized  volunteers  to 
remove  rubble,  distribute  temporary  shelter  kits  and  water  backpacks  in  the  worst-hit 
districts. Later in the reconstruction phase, Habitat Nepal completed safety assessments of 
more than 16,000 damaged houses, and with the onset of winter, over 2,400 winterization 
kits were distributed to help survivors weather the cold. 
 
Habitat  Nepal  is now  looking  forward  to  support  families  in rebuilding  through  an  owner-
driven approach in both disaster-affected and non-affected areas. Further, Habitat Nepal has 
recently  launched  a  Geographic  Information  System  (GIS)  mapping  initiative  to  support 
reconstruction efforts. The geographic data that the system yields will enable Habitat Nepal 
to identify and monitor the construction progress and other program activities for families 
who will rebuild their homes under an owner-driven approach.  

 

3.  Technical background 

The open map kit server is already set up in AWS EC2 instance and it is used for fetching 
data to database from surveying. The baseline surveying is already completed and the 
data are in the server itself. It is uploaded to server from android application (open map 
kit) and the process will be done on regular basis during M & E phases. The next phase of 
task to complete is to develop a web portal for data presentation and management. The 
web portal should contain web maps, visual graphics and CRUD table.  
 
The web portal to be designed should also contain drag and drop elements- if new project 
or survey is added, the map layer, and dashboard should be updated automatically with 
less human workout.  

4.  Objectives for the role 
  Develop and administer web portal services 
  Ensure uptime and proper functionality of AWS EC2 instances 
  Provide ad-hoc troubleshooting support  
  Develop scripts to automate processes as needed 
  Perform routine upgrades of web portal and Open Map Kit server software 

 

 

 

5.  Qualifications, professional experience and skills 
  Experience working with Amazon Web Services or similar environments (Heroku etc.) 
  Experience in Python frameworks or PHP framework and JavaScript mapping libraries 

e.g. Leaflet 1.0.  

  Experience of SQL and database administration 
  Knowledge in Python, in particular process automation  
  Strong ability to understand technical requirements and ad-hoc technical support 

 

How to Apply: Interested agencies are requested to submit a Letter of Interest, with updated 
organization profile, technical proposal and a financial proposal with significant breakdown no 
later than, 5.00 PM, November 9, 2016 to HFH Nepal by e-mail: vacancy@habitatnepal.org 
 
Only shortlisted candidates will be called for interviews. 
 

